---
title: "Rename `join` and `nest` in `async_scope` proposal"
document: P3706R0
date: today
audience: LEWG
author:
  - name: Ruslan Arutyunyan
    email: <ruslan.arutyunyan@intel.com>
  - name: Ville Voutilainen
    email: <ville.voutilainen@gmail.com>
toc: true
toc-depth: 2
---

# Abstract {- .unlisted}

This paper proposes renaming `join` and `nest` methods in `async_scope` proposal [@P3149R9]

# Motivation {#motivation}

[@P3149R9] provides a one of the important pieces for [exec]{- .sref} ([@P2300R10] proposal) to complete a picture.
The facilities allow to group the asynchronous work by associating it with scopes and then wait at some point for all
associated work to be completed. It a bridge from the unstructured concurrency to the structured one with saying that
individual pieces of work (possibly on different execution contexts) become the one, combined work. The facilities also
support

- associating the work and run it (eager execution)
- associating the work but getting back a sender to run it later (lazy execution)

Despite all the advantages, some names might be arguably misleading because they are either not following the existing
practices or might have a different meaning in the same or very close domains: concurrency and parallelism.

[@P3149R9] has a section that ruminates about naming. But this discussion never happened in LEWG and/or in reflector.

[@P3685R0] started making improvements by proposing `async_scope_token` -> `scope_token` renaming. We want to make it even
better with this proposal by renaming `join` and `nest`. There are other candidates to be renamed as well, however the
existing names are also fine and authors cannot come up with better alternative, so other than `join` and `nest` the rest is
out of scope for this paper.

# Rename `join` member functions {#rename_join}

The name `join` is problematic because we already have `join` in the standard for threads but in a different way. [@P3149R9]
tells about similarity between `std::thread::join` and `execution::counting_scope::join`, however there is a fundamental
difference: `join` for `std::thread` is a blocking call. It blocks the current thread and waits till its completion.
`counting_scope::join`, on the other hand, is not blocking. It returns a sender that signals when all the work associated
with a scope is completed. Consider the following comparison table:

::: cmptable

> `thread::join` vs `counting_scope::join`

### `thread::join`
```cpp






// create the thread doing some work
std::thread t1([]{ /* some work */ });




// block a current thread and waits for t1 completion
t1.join();





```

### `counting_scope::join`
```cpp
namespace ex = std::execution;

my_thread_pool pool;
ex::counting_scope scope;

// create sender to run within async scope
auto snd = ex::transfer_just(pool.get_scheduler()) |
               ex::then([] { /* some work */ });

// associate snd and launch the work
ex::spawn(snd, scope.get_token());

// !!! Has no effect. Returns sender that is discarded
scope.join();

// Users have to call sync_wait explicitly on the
// returned sender by join to get the expected behavior
this_thread::sync_wait(scope.join());
```
:::

As you can see in the example above, `counting_scope::join` does not block as some might expect. It returns a sender that
can signal that the all associated work with the scope is completed. Somebody might argue that this is a quality of
implementation: implementers can put `[[nodiscard]]` attribute on the function and emit a warning. While this is true
it does not eliminate the fact that the name itself it not helpful to recognize such behavior.

In [@libunifex] there is a v1 of `async_scope` (the latest one is v2 as far as we can tell) that names this function as
`complete`. While this name is better in our opinion, it still does not give any clue that the function itself is
non-blocking.

Together with authors of [@P3149R9] and some other people we considered a bunch of names. For example, `complete`,
`cleanup`, `drain`, `completes`, `completes_when`, `done`, etc.

It seems like people converge to have `when_` prefix, similar to `when_all`. Given that we mentioned a term *completion*
several times in this paper, we suggest to rename `join` function to `when_completed` because in our opinion it's much
clearer and gives users better understanding of what's going on.

The last line of the code in the column with `counting_scope` looks like this with out proposal:

```cpp
this_thread::sync_wait(scope.when_completed());
```

# Rename `nest` {#rename_nest}

There is a term that is called *nested parallelism*. It means that some piece of work spawns more work from a
asynchronous/parallel context.

One of the APIs that creates a nested parallelism (or nested work) in [@P2300R10] is `let_value`. It, basically, runs the
returned sender from the passed function and waits for its completion to send the computed values further. This
returned-by-the-passed-function-sender is a nested work. [@P3149R9] itself contains the example with nested parallelism in
the example with handling a tree using `spawn_future` and `let_value`.

However, `nest` name itself doesn't imply nested parallelism at all. That's why it's confusing. When users call `nest`
they basically want to `associate` the piece of work with the scope, or `attach` the piece of work to the scope. The
execution of the work is deferred.

The API `nest` might be also called like that by historical reasons: previously [@P3149R9]
proposal had `nest` as one of the required operations on scopes by `async_scope` concept. The current state is that the
`async_scope` concept was replaced by the lower level one named `async_scope_token` (hopefully, just `scope_token` after
applying [@P3685R0]) with requiring `try_associate` and `deassociate` methods (plus `wrap`). Also, v1 `async_scope` in
[@libunifex] had the `attach` name instead of `nest`.

In our desire to avoid confusion and also taking into account the previous experience we can recommend two names instead of
`nest`. It's either `associate` or `attach`. Given that [@P3149R9] talks about association a lot, this is the preferred
option, unless authors of [@P3149R9] think that the similarity to `try_associate` is more confusing than helpful. If this is
the case then `attach` is also a good choice.

# Proposal {#proposal}

- Rename `join` to `when_completed`
- Rename `nest` to `associate`

# Wording {#wording}

Since [@P3149R9] is still in active LWG review phase the wording for renaming does not make a lot of sense. We will need
to work with `async_scope` authors to make sure that all the changes are incorporated from this proposal, if it passes.

---
references:
  - id: P3685R0
    citation-label: P3685R0
    title: Rename `async_scope_token`
    author:
      - family: Leahy
        given: Robert
    URL: https://isocpp.org/files/papers/P3685R0.pdf
  - id: libunifex
    citation-label: libunifex
    title: libunifex
    author:
      - family:
        given:
    URL: https://github.com/facebookexperimental/libunifex
---

